hello just something quick about a
twitter exchange that happened today and
because I want to test out the
microphone people have been suggesting
that the volume needs to be turned up on
all of my videos I know technically
incompetent but I have all sorts of
equipment around me at the moment that I
haven't got on camera but I'm doing my
best to improve the exchange was between
David Deutsch and Claire Lehmann I
believe her name is and they were
talking about the extent to which people
can have genetically determined traits
that in fact our mental traits so I'm
just reading the exchange here where
Claire Lima and Lima and she said
earlier I apologize
she says in short the idea that people
can't be born bad is just blank slate
nonsense like all traits psychopathy is
heritable now it seems to be that there
is a choice that we're expected to make
and the choice that we're expected to
make is whether or not the blank slate
is true in other words people are born
without any genetic predispositions
towards any kind of behavior or our
behavior is genetically determined at
least in part and these are the two
choices that you have you your your
behavior is determined by your genes at
least in part or not at all there's a
third way there's a third way that
doesn't involve ideas coming to us via
our genes or insofar as they do
nonetheless they remain ideas that can
be changed there is a third way we do
not have to choose between genetic
determinism whether it's some kind of
under determinism we're not all of your
behaviors are kinetically determined but
at least some of them are
or on the other hand the blank slate
hypothesis and this is the idea where
none of your behaviors are determined by
your genes well the third way is that
whilst you might have genetically
determined behaviors that you are born
with these behaviors are caused by ideas
sam harris likes to say that belief is
the lever that pushes behavior something
like that and i think it's quite right
that insofar as you have knowledge I
would say rather than believe that you
have ideas that these are the things
that cause you to carry out the
behaviors that you do now the question
then is what to what extent are the
genes that we have our genetic
information informing our behaviors
let's take a specific example you know
struggle to come up with something
that's not controversial but what about
that human babies have an instinct for
suckling I have an instinct for suckling
at breast to get milk no one seems to
teach them this they do our sucking
motion if you've ever known a baby they
seem to be born with this its inborn its
genetic it's an instinct
at some point they cease to do this we
move beyond this behavior insofar as
it's an instinct somehow we don't do it
anymore
now people might say well we grow out of
it what I want to say to that is if it's
in the genes the DNA does not change so
that behavior which I would suggest is
indeed an instinct is indeed coded
somehow in the DNA is nonetheless
expressed in the mind
in the brain which then causes behavior
the sucking behavior the babies have and
although the genes have put it into the
mind in some way that we don't
understand once there it is subject to
precisely the same sorts of processes
that any other idea in our mind is
subject to in particular it's subject to
improvement it's subject to criticism
and it's subject to change whatever the
idea is that's in our mind can be
changed it doesn't matter if the source
is instinctual or genetic it doesn't
matter where the idea came from if it's
been encoded in our genes this does not
mean it determines our behavior because
we can change whatever the idea which
was determined by genetics is so if the
genes determined some kind of idea in
our mind within determines behavior I
think it's a three-step process it's not
genes and behavior you must pass through
the mind the mind part can always be
changed so all inborn traits of which I
would suggest there are many are ideas
and they can be changed they might be
hard to change I admit there might be
hard to change but we're not condemned
in some way by virtue of having genes
that Claire is suggesting provide us
with a propensity for certain kinds of
behaviors we are not condemned to carry
out those I just returned to them to
Claire's response to David David David
says at some point so since bad in this
context is felis plus something some are
born felis does not imply some are born
bad unless the something is also inborn
right Claire agrees she says okay so I
should have said the idea that people
can't be
with a predisposition for being bad is
blank slate nonsense
so this idea of being born with a
predisposition yes we can be born with a
predisposition towards suckling milk at
the breasts we move beyond it we change
our ideas about that and in fact we're
taught that we no longer need to do that
it would be a very strange society we
would be if we were unable to move
beyond that in fact all of us all of us
move beyond it so that inborn behavior
inborn genetic information which makes
it way into our minds to cause us to
control our bodies in such a way that we
do suckle at the breast up until we
don't anymore because we've changed
their mind is a predisposition so now
let's take Claire seriously on this
point if some people are born with a
predisposition for being bad this does
not mean they're going to be bad this
does not mean they're going to grow up
being bad now I reject the notion they
can be born with a predisposition for
being bad they I think bad is such a
general term such a broad catch-all term
this idea of psychopathy this idea that
people behave in certain ways that we
find objectionable if something like
suckling milk is a behavior that we are
all born with the all predisposed to do
and we can all change it is hard some
people would say it's hardwired language
that's Trump but somehow our the hard
wiring is undone so it can't be that
hard it appears to be a software thing
if that can be changed then if you can
find genetics genetic information but
some sort of coding for bad it too can
be changed this predisposition is not a
condemnation and if people were to go
out actively searching for the genes
that code for psychopathy and found it
that would be no more informative of a
child or adolescents or adults behavior
then would finding the genes that code
for suckling milk because even though
everyone seems to be determined
genetically to suckle milk we move
beyond it so this idea of genetic
predisposition or this idea of blank
slate nests are both incorrect they're
both incorrect because they fail to take
seriously the notion that the brain is a
computer upon which runs the software of
the mind and the software of the mind
can be overwritten with new ideas with
new knowledge through conjecture
guessing new ideas and refutation
criticizing those ideas this is how our
mind works this is how we learn and
regardless of whether or not the ideas
that we have or some set of the ideas
that we have are genetically predisposed
this does not change the fact that our
ideas this does not change the fact that
they are knowledge and knowledge cannot
be fixed it cannot be constructed in
such a way that it is immune from
criticism unless we've taken aboard some
anti rational means so this is the
solution to the the debate that's going
on between B world blank slate that we
have no inborn ideas and no we do have
some in board ideas and they genetically
determined you're ignoring the science
the the the way to resolve this is to
recognize that it's not a blank slate
but the genetically determined ideas are
not fixed they remain ideas and makes
who can be changed like all ideas they
don't have some sort of supernatural
status there are ideas they're a form of
knowledge and they are subject to the
same rules of epistemology namely those
that govern criticism and enable ideas
to be changed as any other kind of
knowledge now hopefully my audio work
this time thank you